[blog]: Expose OTEL Collector with Gateway API and mTLS (#6655)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/expose-otel-collector-gateway-api/index.md

---

> title: Securely Exposing Your  OTEL Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API and mTLS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Securely Exposing Your  OTEL Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API and mTLS
linkTitle: tbd
```

Please come up with a short title, that will be used for the link and in the navigation. Most titles do only have a few words

date: 2025-04-6
author: >
  [Vipin Vijaykumar](https://github.com/vipinvkmenon)

> sig: OpenTelemetry JS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sig: OpenTelemetry JS
```

Based on #6502, this is not the sponsoring SIG, either @open-telemetry/sig-end-user-approvers, but I also think there has to be support from @open-telemetry/operator-approvers and @open-telemetry/collector-approvers

Author: Have updated to End User SIG

Author: Anything to add in the sig?

cSpell:ignore: Danielson
---

> # Securely Exposing Your  OTEL Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API and mTLS

Reviewer: You don't need to add your h1 title once again, this will be added based on the `title` above.

> **Goal:** 
> 
> Exposing an OpenTelemetry (OTEL) Collector running inside Kubernetes to the outside world securely, using the Kubernetes Gateway API and mutual TLS (mTLS) for authentication and encryption. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this blog post is to demonstrate, how you can expose an OpenTelemetry (OTel) Collector running inside Kubernetes to the outside world securely, using the Kubernetes Gateway API and mutual TLS (mTLS) for authentication and encryption. 
```

Also add links to the Kubernetes Gateway API

As observability becomes increasingly critical in modern distributed systems, centralizing telemetry data via an OTEL Collector is common practice. Often, services or agents running *outside* your Kubernetes cluster need to send data *to* this collector. Exposing internal services requires careful consideration of security and standardization. This is where the Kubernetes Gateway API and mTLS shine.

> Typicall this kind of a setup is useful when you have applications/ workloads that are external to the cluster and you need to collect the telemetry data. Some examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically this kind of a setup is useful when you have applications/ workloads that are external to the cluster and you need to collect the telemetry data. Some examples:
```

Our spell checker provides you with some suggestions on wording issues, please review them and fix them accordingly (e.g. also the repeated issue of "OTEL" vs "OTel"

- **Hybrid Cloud/On-Premise Environments:** Applications or servers running in a traditional data center, or a different cloud or external to your Kubernetes cluster need to forward their metrics, traces, or logs to your central observability solution.

> -  **Multi-Cluster Telemetry Aggregation:** In a setup with multiple Kubernetes clusters, you might designate one cluster to host the primary OTEL collector. Collectors in other "spoke" clusters would act as clients, exporting data to this central collector via its external endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Multi-Cluster Telemetry Aggregation:** In a setup with multiple Kubernetes clusters, you might designate one cluster to host the primary OTEL collector. Collectors in other "spoke" clusters would act as clients, exporting data to this central collector via its external endpoint.
```

-  **Edge Computing / IoT:** Devices deployed at the edge often need to send operational data back to a central platform.
-  **Serverless Functions / PaaS:** Applications running on serverless platforms (like AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions) or Platform-as-a-Service offerings outside your cluster may need to export OTLP data.
-  **External Monitoring Agents:** Third-party agents or locally running development instances needing to connect to a shared collector within the cluster.

## Prerequisites

Before we start, ensure you have the following:

1.  **A Kubernetes Cluster:** Minikube, Kind, Docker Desktop, Gardener or a cloud provider's managed Kubernetes service will work. 
2.  **`kubectl`:** Configured to interact with your cluster.
3.  **`helm`:**  Configured to install helm charts.
4.  **A Gateway API Implementation:** We'll use **Istio** in this example. Other implementations like Contour, Nginx Gateway Fabric,   etc., would also work with potentially minor configuration adjustments.

> 5.  **`openssl`:** For generating certificates.

Author: Done

---
title: Exposing OTel Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API & mTLS
linkTitle: OTel with gateway and mtls
date: 2025-04-06
author: >
  [Vipin Vijaykumar](https://github.com/vipinvkmenon)
sig: End-User SIG

> cSpell:ignore: ingressgateway otlpgrpc Vijaykumar Vipin

Author: Done

    OTLP gRPC, using the client certificate and trusting the Root CA.

![Scenario Diagram](ScenarioFlow.png)

## Setup

### Step 1: Install Gateway API CRD.

By default, the Gateway APIs do not come installed in the Kubernetes Cluster. As
of writing this blog, latest is
[v1.2](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/v1.2/). Install the
Gateway API CRDs if not present:

```bash
kubectl get crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io &> /dev/null || \
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.1/standard-install.yaml

#To support GRPCRoute as of now. Would not be required once GRPCRoute CRD becomes GA.
kubectl kustomize "github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/config/crd/experimental?ref=v1.2.0" | kubectl apply -f -
```

### Step 2: Generate Self Signed Certificates

In order to setup mTLS between the client and the server, we need a set of
certificates. For this demo scenario, we'll be using self-signed certificate. We
will be using the same CA for signing both clients and server in this demo.
We'll use `openssl` to create our certificates. Please refer `openssl`

> documentation for configuration details.

Reviewer: what would I do in a non demo scenario, can you outline that or provide some perspective, can something like cert-manager be used to automate/simplify this?

    (e.g., `"certificate signed by unknown authority"`, `"bad certificate"`) or
    `connection refused` errors indicate a problem. Check:
    - Gateway IP/hostname reachability.
    - Firewall rules.
    - Correct certificates (`ca_file`, `cert_file`, `key_file`) used by the
      client.
    - Correct `server_name_override` matching the server certificate SAN/CN.
    - Correct mTLS configuration on the Gateway (including client CA
      validation).
    - Gateway controller logs (For e.g `istio-ingressgateway` pod logs in
      `istio-system`) for TLS errors.
3.  **Test Failure Case:**
    - Try running the client _without_ the `tls:` section in its `otlpgrpc`
      exporter configuration. The connection should be rejected by the Gateway
      (likely a TLS handshake failure or connection reset).
    - Try commenting out the `ca_file`, `cert_file`, or `key_file` in the client
      config. The connection should fail.
    - If you have another certificate signed by a _different_ CA, try using that
      as the client certificate. The Gateway should reject it during the mTLS
      handshake because it's not signed by the trusted CA.

> ## Caveats:

Author: Done

---
title: Exposing OTel Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API & mTLS

> linkTitle: OTel with gateway and mtls

Author: That makes sense

[GAMMA initiative](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/mesh/gamma/) defines the
Gateway API implementation. It was introduced for the following reasons:

- **Limitations of Ingress:** The Ingress API, while useful, became limiting. It
  lacked standardization across implementations and also limited routing
  capabilities that varied widely across different implementations.
- **Role Separation:** Gateway API separates concerns:
  - `GatewayClass`: Defines a _type_ of load balancer (e.g., Istio, GKE LB).
    Managed by Infrastructure Admins.
  - `Gateway`: Represents an instance of a load balancer requesting a specific
    `GatewayClass`. Defines listeners (ports, protocols, TLS). Managed by
    Cluster Operators. They can be shared across namespaces as well.
  - `HTTPRoute`, `GRPCRoute`, `TCPRoute`, `TLSRoute`, etc.: Define
    application-level routing rules, attaching to a `Gateway`. Managed by
    Application Developers/Owners.
- **Portability:** Standardized API definition aims for greater portability
  across different underlying gateway/service mesh implementations.
- **Expressiveness:** Natively supports advanced features like header

>   manipulation, traffic splitting, mTLS configuration, gRPC routing, and more.

Author: My thought was that the primer might be a good recap/intro. But your point is valid. It makes more sense for the reader to understand this from the K8s documentation. I've added a link for mTLS. So, I would also support and agree to the removal of the block. In addition to the documentation links, these would keep information about these topics more up to date.

north-south traffic compared to the traditional Ingress API.

## mTLS - A brief introduction

Mutual TLS (mTLS) extends standard TLS by requiring _both_ the client and server
to present and validate certificates for mutual authentication.

Standard TLS (like HTTPS on websites) verifies the _server's_ identity to the
_client_. Mutual TLS (mTLS) goes a step further:

- The client verifies the server's identity (using the server's certificate).
- The server _also_ verifies the client's identity (using the client's
  certificate).

Mutual TLS is important because it provides strong authentication, ensures
end-to-end encryption, and aligns with Zero Trust security principles:

- Ensures _only_ trusted clients (those possessing a valid certificate signed by
  trusted CA) can connect to your exposed service.

- All communication between the authenticated client and the server (such as a
  Gateway) is encrypted.

- It supports a Zero Trust model by requiring verification from both parties,
  never assuming trust by default.

## The Scenario

1.  Deploy an OTel Collector inside Kubernetes configured with a simple OTLP

>     gRPC receiver.

Author: Yes makes sense

kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.1/standard-install.yaml

#To support GRPCRoute as of now. Would not be required once GRPCRoute CRD becomes GA.
kubectl kustomize "github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/config/crd/experimental?ref=v1.2.0" | kubectl apply -f -
```

### Step 2: Generate Self Signed Certificates

In order to setup mTLS between the client and the server, we need a set of
certificates. For this demo scenario, we'll be using self-signed certificate. We
will be using the same CA for signing both clients and server in this demo.
We'll use `openssl` to create our certificates. Please refer `openssl`
documentation for configuration details.

```bash
# Variables (adjust domain/names as needed)
export ROOT_CA_SUBJ="/CN=MyDemoRootCA"
# Use a relevant CN/SAN for the server/gateway. If clients connect via IP, include it.
# For DNS, use the hostname clients will use (e.g., otel.example.com)
export SERVER_HOSTNAME="otel-gateway.example.com"
export SERVER_SUBJ="/CN=${SERVER_HOSTNAME}"
export CLIENT_SUBJ="/CN=external-otel-client"

# 1. Create Root CA certificate and key

> openssl req -x509 -sha256 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 -subj -subj "${ROOT_CA_SUBJ}" -keyout rootCA.key -out rootCA.pem

Author: Oopsie my bad.

# 2. Create Server CSR & sign with Root CA
openssl req -newkey rsa:4096 -nodes -keyout server.key -out server.csr -subj "${SERVER_SUBJ}" \
  -addext "subjectAltName = DNS:${SERVER_HOSTNAME}" # Add SAN for hostname validation

> openssl x509 -req -in server.csr -CA rootCA.crt -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out server.pem -days 365 -sha256 \

Author: Typo

# 3. Create Client CSR and sign with Root CA
openssl req -newkey rsa:4096 -nodes -keyout client.key -out client.csr -subj "${CLIENT_SUBJ}"

openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -CA rootCA.crt -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out client.pem -days 365 -sha256
```

{{% alert %}}

For production, never use self-signed certificates for external-facing endpoints
accessible from the public internet. Use certificates issued by a trusted public
CA (e.g., Let's Encrypt through cert-manager) or a managed internal PKI system.
The process of obtaining certs would differ, but the concepts of using them in
Kubernetes remain similar. Ensure the server certificate's Common Name (CN) or
Subject Alternative Name (SAN) matches the hostname clients use to connect.

{{% /alert %}}

## Step 3: Create `otel-collector` namespace

We will deploy our otel-collector setup in the given namespace. Further on,
depending on the Gateway/service-mesh implementation you use, you may configure
the namespace accordingly. For e.g: with istio, we need to label the namespace
for `istio-injection:enabled` inorder for istio to work with the deployed

> workloads in the namespace

Author: Yes makes sense. Noted

metadata:
  name: otel-collector-conf
  namespace: otel-collector # Deploy collector in otel-collector namespace
data:
  otel-collector-config.yaml: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            # Note: No TLS config here. TLS terminates at the Gateway.
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317

    processors:
      batch:

    exporters:
      # For demo purposes, log to stdout
      debug:

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [debug]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [debug]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [debug]
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: otel-collector-server
  namespace: otel-collector # Deploy collector in otel-collector namespace
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: otel-collector-server
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: otel-collector-server
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: otel-collector
          # Use a specific, recent version tag in production

>           image: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.119.0

Author: updated to non-contrib

          command:

>             ['/otelcol-contrib', '--config=/conf/otel-collector-config.yaml']

Author: Updated to using th non-contrib image and referred [documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#location)

          ports:
            - containerPort: 4317 # OTLP gRPC
              name: otlp-grpc
          volumeMounts:
            - name: otel-collector-config-vol
              mountPath: /conf
      volumes:
        - name: otel-collector-config-vol
          configMap:
            name: otel-collector-conf
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: otel-collector-server-svc
  namespace: otel-collector
spec:
  selector:
    app: otel-collector-server
  ports:
    - name: grpc
      protocol: TCP
      port: 4317
      targetPort: 4317
```

Apply this configuration:

```bash
kubectl apply -f otel-collector-server.yaml
```

## Step 5: Storing Certificates as Kubernetes Secrets

The Gateway needs access to the server certificate/key and the CA certificate to
validate clients.

```bash
# Create a secret with the server certificate, key. We will also store the ca certificate used to sign clients
# For this demo, we place it in the default namespace

> k create secret generic otel-gateway-server-cert --from-file=tls.crt=server.pem --from-file=tls.key=server.key --from-file=ca.crt=rootCA.pem

Author: Updated and kept all places uniform

```

## Step 6: Configuring the Kubernetes Gateway API Resources

We need two resources: `Gateway` and `GRPCRoute`.

`otel-gateway.yaml`:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: otel-gateway

>   namespace: default

Author: Not really.. I'll mention this is just for the demo

spec:
  # Corresponds to the GatewayClass installed in your cluster (e.g., istio)
  gatewayClassName: istio
  #infrastructure: #Use to configure infrastructure annotations for your sepcific cluster. For e.g DNS
  #annotations:

>   #specific-anotations:value

Author: Removed

      exporter configuration. The connection should be rejected by the Gateway
      (likely a TLS handshake failure or connection reset).
    - Try commenting out the `ca_file`, `cert_file`, or `key_file` in the client
      config. The connection should fail.
    - If you have another certificate signed by a _different_ CA, try using that
      as the client certificate. The Gateway should reject it during the mTLS
      handshake because it's not signed by the trusted CA.

## Caveats

In this walkthrough, certain steps were done in a specific way to make it easy
to run and understand the configuration and scenario. These must be taken care
of when configuring this setup during production:

- `Self-signed` certificates should **not** be used in production. Also, `CA`
  certificates used for clients are also generally different than the one used
  for signing the server certificates.
- The Kubernetes Gateway API is constantly evolving with more and more features
  coming into the spec. Many of these features are now in alpha/beta and will
  soon become generally available. For e.g `GRPCRoute`. Please refer the latest
  Kubernetes documentation of the Gateway API.

> - The Kubernetes Gateway API aim to make the configuration protable and

Reviewer 2: "protable" misspelling will now be reported, see:

- #6907

  implementation agnostic as much as possible. Ideally this would be the case
  onces the spec is matured and evolved. Till then, certain aspects of the

>   configuration will have minor changes between implementations. For e.g, The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  configuration will have minor changes between implementations. For example, the
```

>   way `MTLS` is configured in the Gateway now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  way mTLS is configured in the Gateway now.
```

- When running in production, you may want to use the `infrastructure` block of
  the `spec` to configure infrastructure-provider specific parameters. For e.g
  `DNS`.

> - Productive setups would have end-2-end encrypted communication. For e.g, when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Productive setups would have end-to-end encrypted communication. For example, when
```

>   using istio, all components running within namespaces managed by istio in a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  using Istio, all components running within namespaces managed by Istio in a
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks for catching this. See: 

- #6907

that are external to the cluster, and you need to collect their telemetry data.
Some examples:

- **Hybrid Cloud/On-Premise Environments:** Applications or servers running in a
  traditional data center, or a different cloud or external to your Kubernetes
  cluster need to forward their metrics, traces, or logs to your central
  observability solution.
- **Multi-Cluster Telemetry Aggregation:** In a setup that might run on multiple
  Kubernetes clusters, you might designate one cluster to host the primary OTel
  Collector deployment. Collectors in other "spoke" clusters would act as
  clients, exporting data to this central collector via its external endpoint.
  An interesting use to mention here is when workloads running in multi-cluster
  service mesh setup want to do tail-sampling on the collector. In this case a
  central collector is needed to aggregate all the spans. The
  [tail sampling processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor)
  can be configured in this central collector sitting behind the Gateway. This
  setup can further be scaled and optimized with the

>   [load balancing exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/loadbalancingexporter).

Reviewer 3: In hindsight, maybe mentioning the `tailsampling` processor is enough. The `loadbalancing` exporter is definitely needed, but it's sort of an implementation detail. The important bit is that tail-sampling needs a central point to process all spans, which you covered in the previous sentence.

      server_name_override: otel-gateway.example.com
service:
  pipelines:
    # Example sending host metrics
    metrics:
      receivers: [hostmetrics]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlpgrpc]
    # Add additional traces/logs pipelines if the client generates them
```

**To run the client:**

1.  Replace `<GATEWAY_EXTERNAL_IP_OR_HOSTNAME>` with the actual external IP
    address or DNS name of your Istio Gateway LoadBalancer service. If using the
    hostname (`otel-gateway.example.com`), ensure your client machine can
    resolve this hostname to the correct IP (e.g., via `/etc/hosts` for testing,
    or actual DNS).

2.  Use the `server_name_override` if the `endpoint` is different from the
    SAN/CN values in the server certificate.

3.  Place the generated `rootCA.crt`, `client.crt`, and `client.key` files in a
    directory accessible to the client collector.

4.  Run the client collector (adjust paths and image tag as needed):

    ```bash
    # Running command assuming certificates and config are in the current directory.

    docker run --rm -v $(pwd)/certs:/etc/cert/ \
               -v $(pwd)/otel-client-config.yaml:/etc/otelcol/config.yaml \

>                otel/opentelemetry-collector:latest

Reviewer 3: I believe for the client you'll need the contrib image, as the core image does not have the `hostmetrics` receiver. Might be worth giving all the scripts a final run on a clean env to make sure it all works as expected.

Author: This is a good point. I rechecked the steps and made a few corrections and updates.

Author: The collector (server) now uses the `otel-core` image and on the client the `otel-contrib`

---
title: Exposing OTel Collector in Kubernetes with Gateway API & mTLS
linkTitle: Collector with Gateway API and mTLS
date: 2025-04-06
author: >

>   [Vipin Vijaykumar](https://github.com/vipinvkmenon)

Author: Sure

_outside_ your Kubernetes cluster need to send data _to_ these Collectors.
Exposing internal services requires careful consideration of security and
standardization. This is where the Kubernetes Gateway API and mTLS shine.

Typically this kind of a setup is useful when you have applications or workloads
that are external to the cluster, and you need to collect their telemetry data.
Some examples:

- **Hybrid Cloud/On-Premises Environments:** Applications or servers running in
  a traditional data center, or a different cloud or external to your Kubernetes
  cluster need to forward their metrics, traces, or logs to your central
  observability solution.
- **Multi-Cluster Telemetry Aggregation:** In a setup that might run on multiple
  Kubernetes clusters, you might designate one cluster to host the primary OTel
  Collector deployment. Collectors in other "spoke" clusters would act as
  clients, exporting data to this central collector via its external endpoint.
  For example, in a multi-cluster service mesh setup, workloads may require tail
  sampling to be performed centrally. In this case, a central collector
  configured with the

>   [tail sampling processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor)

Reviewer 2: Pin the URL to the most current version.

Author: Pinning it to the latest `v0.127.0`

  development instances needing to connect to a shared collector within the
  cluster.
- **Client-Side Monitoring:** Telemetry coming in from external clients like
  browsers and mobile applications. While mTLS may not be used for
  [exporting telemetry from browsers](/docs/languages/js/getting-started/browser/),
  the collectors must ultimately be made available.

## Prerequisites

Before we start, ensure you have the following:

1.  **A Kubernetes Cluster:** Minikube, Kind, Docker Desktop, Gardener or a
    cloud provider's managed Kubernetes service will work.
2.  **`kubectl`:** [Configured](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/)
    to interact with your cluster.
3.  **`helm`:** [Configured](https://helm.sh/) to install Helm charts.
4.  **A Gateway API Implementation:** We'll use
    [Istio](https://istio.io/latest/docs/overview/what-is-istio/) in this
    example. Other implementations like Contour, NGINX Gateway Fabric, etc.
    would also work with potentially minor configuration adjustments.
5.  **`openssl`:** The OpenSSL
    [CLI](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/wiki/Binaries) for generating
    certificates.

> {{% alert %}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="API stability note" color=warning %}}
```

  Kubernetes clusters, you might designate one cluster to host the primary OTel
  Collector deployment. Collectors in other "spoke" clusters would act as
  clients, exporting data to this central collector via its external endpoint.
  For example, in a multi-cluster service mesh setup, workloads may require tail
  sampling to be performed centrally. In this case, a central collector
  configured with the
  [tail sampling processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/tailsamplingprocessor)
  and exposed via a Gateway aggregates spans from all clusters to make sampling
  decisions.
- **Edge Computing / IoT:** Devices deployed at the edge often need to send
  operational data back to a central platform.
- **Serverless Functions / PaaS:** Applications running on serverless platforms
  (like AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions) or Platform-as-a-Service offerings
  outside your cluster may need to export OTLP data.
- **External Monitoring Agents:** Third-party agents or locally running
  development instances needing to connect to a shared collector within the
  cluster.

> - **Client-Side Monitoring** Telemetry coming in from external clients like
>   browsers and mobile applications. While mTLS may not be used in for
>   [sending metrics from the Browsers](/docs/languages/js/getting-started/browser/),
>   the collectors must ultimately be made available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Client-Side Monitoring:** Telemetry coming in from external clients like
  browsers and mobile applications. While mTLS may not be used for
  [exporting telemetry from browsers](/docs/languages/js/getting-started/browser/),
  the collectors must ultimately be made available.
```

    Application Developers/Owners.
- **Portability:** Standardized API definition aims for greater portability
  across different underlying gateway/service mesh implementations.
- **Expressiveness:** Natively supports advanced features like header
  manipulation, traffic splitting, mTLS configuration, gRPC routing, and more.

In essence, Gateway API offers a more robust and standardized model for managing
north-south traffic compared to the traditional Ingress API.

## mTLS - A brief introduction

Mutual TLS (mTLS) extends standard TLS by requiring _both_ the client and server
to present and validate certificates for mutual authentication.

Standard TLS (like HTTPS on websites) verifies the _server's_ identity to the
_client_. Mutual TLS (mTLS) goes a step further:

- The client verifies the server's identity (using the server's certificate).
- The server _also_ verifies the client's identity (using the client's
  certificate).

Mutual TLS is important because it provides strong authentication, ensures
end-to-end encryption, and aligns with Zero Trust security principles:

- Ensures _only_ trusted clients (those possessing a valid certificate signed by

>   trusted CA) can connect to your exposed service.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  trusted Certificate Authority (CA)) can connect to your exposed service.
```

- All communication between the authenticated client and the server (such as a
  Gateway) is encrypted.

- It supports a Zero Trust model by requiring verification from both parties,
  never assuming trust by default.

## The Scenario

Here are the steps we'll follow to expose an OTel Collector deployment outside
the cluster.

> 1.  Deploy an OTel Collector inside Kubernetes configured with a simple

Reviewer 4: This is a bit of a nit, but the numbering of these steps confused me because they don't line up with the "Step N" headings that follow. I would suggest changing this to an unordered list or making the ordered list match the step headings.

    OTLP/gRPC receiver.
2.  Generate a self-signed Root CA, a server certificate (for the Gateway), and
    a client certificate (for the external client).
3.  Configure a Kubernetes `Gateway` resource to listen on a specific port,
    terminate TLS, and require client certificates (mTLS).
4.  Configure a `GRPCRoute` to route incoming gRPC traffic from the `Gateway` to
    the internal OTel Collector service.
5.  Configure an external client (another OTel Collector) to export data via
    OTLP/gRPC, using the client certificate and trusting the Root CA.

![Scenario Diagram](ScenarioFlow.png)

> ## Setup

Reviewer 4: I don't think we need this heading. I'd remove it and bump step 1 and step 2 up to ##-level headings. Otherwise the page nav looks a little strange:

<img width="205" alt="Screenshot 2025-05-29 at 3 13 44 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b0657edc-363c-4a01-8143-b3c101c73757" />

Author: Something like this
<img width="304" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1da3e4eb-ada9-4a40-8a30-634a81c85641" />

openssl x509 -req -in server.csr -CA rootCA.crt -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out server.crt -days 365 -sha256 \
  -extfile <(printf "subjectAltName=DNS:${SERVER_HOSTNAME}") # Ensure SAN is in the final cert

# 3. Create Client CSR and sign with Root CA
openssl req -newkey rsa:4096 -nodes -keyout client.key -out client.csr -subj "${CLIENT_SUBJ}"

openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -CA rootCA.crt -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt -days 365 -sha256
```

{{% alert %}}

For production, never use self-signed certificates for external-facing endpoints
accessible from the public internet. Use certificates issued by a trusted public
CA (e.g., Let's Encrypt through cert-manager) or a managed internal PKI system.
The process of obtaining certs would differ, but the concepts of using them in
Kubernetes remain similar. Ensure the server certificate's Common Name (CN) or
Subject Alternative Name (SAN) matches the hostname clients use to connect.

{{% /alert %}}

## Step 3: Create `otel-collector` namespace

We will deploy our OTel Collector setup in the given namespace. Further on,
depending on the Gateway/service mesh implementation you use, you may configure

> the namespace accordingly. For e.g: with Istio, we can the namespace with

Reviewer 4: Seems like there's a word missing from this sentence. I added "create" but that might not be correct. Also better to spell out "example" in this case.

```suggestion
the namespace accordingly. For example, with Istio, we can create the namespace with
```

metadata:
  name: otel-collector-grpcroute
  # Namespace where the backend service resides
  namespace: otel-collector
spec:
  # Link this route to our Gateway in the istio-system namespace
  parentRefs:
    - name: otel-gateway
      namespace: otel-collector # Namespace of the Gateway resource
      sectionName: otlp-grpc-mtls # Attach to the specific listener by name
  # Define routing rules for gRPC traffic
  rules:
    - backendRefs:
        - name: otel-collector-server-svc # Name of your internal OTel service
          namespace: otel-collector # Namespace of the backend service
          port: 4317 # Target port on the service
```

- In the `Gateway` CRD, we configure the `gatewayclass` and `listeners`. In this
  case we configure one `listener` with the necessary `port` and `hostname`. We
  also configure `tls` which gets terminated here. We use the certificates
  uploaded as secrets. The `options` block is used to configure
  `implementation specific` parameters if any.

- In the `GRPCRoute`, we choose a gateway and the specific `listener`. We also
  configure the backend to which the route forwards the requests. In this case,
  to the `otel-collector-server-svc`.

> _Note: We make use of `options` in the gateway for implementation specific
> configuration of mTLS. Currently the gateway API does not explicitly have
> `Mutual TLS`
> [mode](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#tlsmodetype). Please
> refer latest documentation of Gateway API for updates_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" %}}
We make use of `options` in the gateway for implementation-specific
configuration of mTLS. Currently, the gateway API does not explicitly have
`Mutual TLS`
[mode](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#tlsmodetype). Refer 
to the latest documentation of Gateway API for updates.
{{% /alert %}}
```

Apply the Gateway configuration:

```bash
kubectl apply -f otel-gateway.yaml
```

At this point, the Istio (or other) Gateway should be configured to listen on
port 4317 (usually exposed via a LoadBalancer Service), require mTLS using the
specified server certificate and client CA, and route valid gRPC traffic to the
`otel-collector-server-svc`.

To get details of the Gateway, you can run the following:

```bash
# To get the Gateway hostname/IP
kubectl -n otel-collector get gateway otel-gateway -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}'

# To get the port
kubectl -n otel-collector get gtw otel-gateway -o jsonpath='{.spec.listeners[?(@.name=="otlp-grpc-mtls")].port}'
```

You can also see the Kubernetes service created for your `Gateway`.

```bash
kubectl -n otel-collector get svc
```

## Step 7: Configuring the External OTel Collector (Client)

To test the setup, configure an OTel Collector _outside_ the cluster to send
data to the Gateway's external endpoint using mTLS.

For this demo, the client (OTel Collector) is run locally with Docker.

> A simple configuration for scraping CPU & memory metrics and sending it to the
> server.
> 
> Example `otel-client-config.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example `otel-client-config.yaml` is a simple configuration for scraping CPU and memory metrics and sending them to the server:
```

```

**To run the client:**

1.  Replace `<GATEWAY_EXTERNAL_IP_OR_HOSTNAME>` with the actual external IP
    address or DNS name of your Istio Gateway LoadBalancer service. If using the
    hostname (`otel-gateway.example.com`), ensure your client machine can
    resolve this hostname to the correct IP (e.g., via `/etc/hosts` for testing,
    or actual DNS).

2.  Use the `server_name_override` if the `endpoint` is different from the
    SAN/CN values in the server certificate.

3.  Place the generated `rootCA.crt`, `client.crt`, and `client.key` files in a
    directory accessible to the client collector. In this demo, we keep it in
    `certs` folder.

4.  Run the client collector (adjust paths and image tag as needed):

    ```bash
    # Running command assuming certificates and config are in the current directory.

    docker run --rm -v $(pwd)/certs:/etc/cert/ \
               -v $(pwd)/otel-client-config.yaml:/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml \
               otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.119.0
    ```

We are running a container of `opentelemetry-collector-contrib` by mounting the
`otel-client-config.yaml` and the `certs` folder that contains the certificates.

> ## Step 6: Testing the Connection

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Step 8: Testing the Connection
```

      `istio-system`) for TLS errors.
3.  **Test Failure Case:**
    - Try running the client _without_ the `tls:` section in its `otlp/grpc`
      exporter configuration. The connection should be rejected by the Gateway
      (likely a TLS handshake failure or connection reset).
    - Try commenting out the `ca_file`, `cert_file`, or `key_file` in the client
      config. The connection should fail.
    - If you have another certificate signed by a _different_ CA, try using that
      as the client certificate. The Gateway should reject it during the mTLS
      handshake because it's not signed by the trusted CA.

## Caveats

In this walkthrough, certain steps were done in a specific way to make it easy
to run and understand the configuration and scenario. These must be taken care
of when configuring this setup during production:

- `Self-signed` certificates should **not** be used in production. Also, `CA`
  certificates used for clients are also generally different than the one used
  for signing the server certificates.
- The Kubernetes Gateway API is constantly evolving with more and more features
  coming into the spec. Many of these features are now in alpha/beta and will

>   soon become generally available. For e.g `GRPCRoute`. Please refer the latest

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  soon become generally available, for example, `GRPCRoute`. Refer to the latest
```

  Kubernetes documentation of the Gateway API.
- The Kubernetes Gateway API aims to make the configuration portable and
  implementation agnostic as much as possible. Ideally this would be the case
  once the spec is matured and evolved. Till then, certain aspects of the
  configuration will have minor changes between implementations. For example,
  the way mTLS is configured in the Gateway now.
- When running in production, you may want to use the `infrastructure` block of

>   the `spec` to configure infrastructure-provider specific parameters. For e.g
>   `DNS`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the `spec` to configure infrastructure-provider specific parameters, for example,
  `DNS`.
```

- Productive setups would have end-to-end encrypted communication. For example,
  when using Istio, all components running within namespaces managed by Istio in
  a cluster can be forced to communicate with each other. This is achieved with
  [PeerAuthentication](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/peer_authentication/).
  Similar concepts would be available for other service mesh implementations as
  well.
- When working with routes and gateways in multiple namespaces, you may need
  references of resources such as backend `services`, and other configurations

>   from other namespaces. For this please refer to Gateway

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  from other namespaces. For details, refer to Gateway
```

  [ReferenceGrant](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/referencegrant/).

## Alternative Gateway Implementations

> While we used Istio (`gatewayClassName: istio`), the core benefits of the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While we used Istio (`gatewayClassName: istio`), the core benefit of the
```
